[THEME MUSIC]
>>REGINA MEREDITH: In my last
conversation with Matthew Fox,
we spoke about the phenomenal
life of Hildegard von Bingen.
And today we will speak
of Meister Eckhart, whom
she preceded by 150 years.
They were both
part of what became
known as the Rhineland Mystics.
According to Dr. Fox,
their mystic visions
and understandings are the
vital bridge between religion,
science, and cosmology.
Welcome back.
I so loved our last
conversation about Hildegard.
>>MATTHEW FOX: So do I, Regina.
Looking forward to this one.
>>REGINA: Yes.
And so, Meister Eckhart--
equally as little known
in the world today, except
for some people that
have these esoteric
understandings--
was as brilliant a being as she.
>>FOX: Absolutely.
In his own right, yes.
He was not as broad
a personality.
>>REGINA: Well, yeah, she
was quite the creator.
>>FOX: He didn't write music.
She was the creator.
He didn't paint and write
music and do healings.
But as a mystic and
philosopher, he was astounding.
And he lived 1260 to 1329.
Rumi died when Eckhart
was 13 years old.
And then Hafiz, the Sufi
mystic who followed Rumi,
was a contemporary of Eckhart's.
And Thomas Aquinas died
when Eckhart was 17.
And then, Mechthild of Magdeburg
died when he was, like, 20
or so.
So he's part of this ongoing.
There was something in
the air at that time,
like there is today.
>>REGINA: Yeah, there was, like,
a mystical revolution going on
at the time.
>>FOX: Exactly.
And he drank deeply of it.
>>REGINA: I mean, do you know
if he was aware of Rumi, Hafiz,
the others?
The Sufis?
>>FOX: He was definitely
aware of the Sufis.
Because he cites
Avicenna, who was
a Muslim philosopher who lived
about 150 years before them.
And he cites him 13 times.
He gives credit to
Avicenna for the idea
of the spark of the soul.
He says, this one
philosopher talks
about the spark of the soul.
So he goes on about
the spark of the soul.
We all have this spark.
Which is, he says,
the Holy Spirit in us.
Or in other places he
says, it's the manger
where the Christ is born in us.
And he develops that.
And of course, he was very
familiar with the Kabbalah,
with the Jewish
mystical happening
that was also occurring
at the very same time.
Now, what's interesting,
I have a whole chapter
in my recent book on Eckhart
on Sufism in Eckhart.
I also have a chapter
on Buddhism in Eckhart.
He did not know
Buddhists or Buddhism.
But he comes to
the same experience
that the Buddhists talk about.
It's astounding.
>>REGINA: Again, these
essential truths in life.
>>FOX: Exactly.
>>REGINA: And same as we had
talked about in Hildegard,
she just innately understood
and was given downloaded visions
of these essential truths.
And for just a moment, I
want to backtrack a bit.
Because you and
Meister Eckhart were
both of the Dominican order.
But also, you were
educated in Paris.
And you both had the
same kind of experience
with the church itself,
politically speaking.
So did you have and did you
feel some kind of alignment
with him, early on, when you
were first exposed to him?
>>FOX: Well, I'll tell you,
I was not exposed to them
by the Dominicans.
Because he was condemned
a week after he died.
>>REGINA: Yes, of course.
>>FOX: And so he was lost
to mainstream Christianity,
unfortunately.
But I'll tell you, I was in a
serious car accident in 1976.
And two years later,
I had an operation.
And during that operation,
Eckhart came to me.
And we walked together
on the beach, silently.
And it was the most--
>>REGINA: How amazing.
What happened?
>>FOX: One of my most
profound dreams of my life.
And I knew, from then on, that
he and I had a relationship.
And then I had to
pursue him more deeply.
>>REGINA: When you walked
on the beach with him,
what was the nature
of the understanding?
What passed between you?
>>FOX: Well, again,
it was in silence.
We didn't speak.
But what can I say?
It was, simply, very
supportive and brotherly.
I was still a Dominican then.
But I was writing a book
on compassion at the time.
And I was looking for
Western theologians
who had written on compassion.
I was appalled at how
few had written about it.
They wrote all these
books on contemplation
but very little on compassion.
But then I found Eckhart.
And he had a whole
sermon on Jesus
saying be compassionate
as your creator in heaven
is compassionate, Luke 6.
And I knew I had
found a brother there.
And then I found,
in his writings,
whole sentences that I
had published the year,
never having met him.
>>REGINA: Never
having seen them.
>>FOX: On an article I did on
sacred space and sacred time.
So this really freaked me out.
But I realized I did
have a brother here.
And that's when I really
went for him in a big way.
And I translated.
I was the first to
translate into English
from the critical German
edition, 36 of his sermons
with a commentary after each.
And then I did a little
book, "Meditations
with Meister Eckhart."
But that was over 30 years ago.
This new book I've
done, "Meister Eckhart:
A Mystic-Warrior
for Our Times"--
this is the first book I've
written on him in 30 years.
But I've been teaching
him all these years
and realizing what an impact
he has on people's lives.
>>REGINA: And what's
interesting is in that era,
as we just talked about--
where you have Rumi and Hafiz
and Thomas Aquinas and
himself and others-- there
was an opening, a
portal of sorts.
It was the time for this
kind of mystical information,
these essential truths
to pour through.
Which, I think is
fair to say, even
though there's a fair amount
of resistance to it even today.
The same thing
has been happening
over the last 50 or 100 years
and through moment in time,
right?
>>FOX: I think so, definitely.
And again, it's very
ecumenical today, of course.
I'm mean, we're reading
Buddhists and Hindus and Sufis
today and experiencing them.
And of course, Jewish scholars
too, like Rabbi Heschel.
So that's what I try
to do in this book,
is to put him in the room with
these 20th century thinkers.
Because, like you say,
there's a common truth
that all religions
come to, especially
around the experience
of the omnipresence
of the divine in all things.
And call it the Buddha Nature.
Call it the cause of Christ.
Call it the image of God, as
the Jewish tradition does,
or the Shekinah.
But this is lost when religion
goes its own way and starts
drawing attention to itself and
wants to build its buildings
and create its hierarchies.
And you know, you're not
going to reform religion.
Carl Jung said that, that
only the mystics bring what
is creative to religion itself.
So if we're going to make
religion shape up and serve
today, instead of
kind of, well, go
to war against
each other-- which,
of course, is happening-- we
have to go back to the mystics.
Because they distill the real
essence of religion for us.
And Eckhart is the
greatest mystic,
certainly of Christianity.
And probably of the west.
And the proof of it is that he
was condemned, like Jesus was.
>>REGINA: All good men like you.
You were condemned as well.
We're going to go into
that a little bit.
But I wonder, too, what
is your perception,
in new age parlance, the field
where everything is connected,
where time continues?
In that case, even
where incarnations
continue with the soul
to express themselves
throughout time.
How do you feel about
that innate connection
you have with Eckhart and
these ancient mystics?
>>FOX: Well, in the
theological tradition,
we talk about the
community of saints.
More ancient cultures
talk about the ancestors.
They're still with us.
And I hear many
stories from people
whose loved ones have died.
And then they have Resurrection
experiences with these people.
I have a friend who's
not at all religious.
He's very blue collar.
He builds things with
his hands all the time.
And his mother died.
And three months
later, she showed up
at the end of his bed.
And they had a conversation.
And every time he
tells me about it,
you know, tears
come to his eyes.
It's just a reality.
This happened to him.
And so that, to me--
and among other things--
it puts the Jesus
experience-- the many people
who experienced him after the
Resurrection-- into context.
This happens a lot when
people love each other.
So the idea that our
lives are limited
to this one time
around, so to speak,
and that consciousness
dies when we die,
I don't think there's a
lot of evidence for that.
I think most of the evidence
is in the opposite corner,
that all kinds of people have
experiences of ancestors.
>>REGINA: So you're somehow
dancing in the field
with this other consciousness?
>>FOX: That's right.
We belong to many fields.
Here's a wonderful story.
David Paladin,
you've heard of him.
But he's a Navajo painter.
And quickly, he volunteered
for the army, second World War.
Lied about his age.
He was only 16.
He was captured
immediately in Europe,
put in a concentration
camp, not in a GI
camp, where he was tortured
mercilessly for four years.
When the Americans
liberated the camp,
they found his
body at the bottom
of a pile of dead bodies.
He weighed 65 pounds.
He was comatose and paraplegic.
They brought him back
to his tribe in Arizona.
And two years later, he
came out of his coma.
And they said, well,
you have a choice.
You will be a paraplegic
in a wheelchair the rest
of your life in a VA hospital.
Or we'll try to heal
you in the ancient ways.
And he said, let's
try the ancient ways.
So they took this
guy, a paraplegic,
to an ice-cold river and
threw him in over his head.
He said, he was more
angry at his elders
than he was at the Nazis
who did this to him.
But it worked.
He walked for the rest of life.
He took two pilgrimages by
foot to Mexico and back.
But he was a painter.
And after he died,
I visited his wife.
Because he was very
interested in my work,
"Original Blessing."
Because it connected
his Christian
and his Native American roots.
And I saw his paintings.
She told me this story.
She said, often dead artists
would come to my husband
at night.
And he would paint for them.
And then she went
and got a painting.
And immediately, I said,
well, that's Paul Klee.
And sure enough, it
was signed Paul Klee.
She said, I remember the night
when Paul Klee came to him
and dictated this painting.
>>REGINA: Wow.
>>FOX: So all I'm
saying, is life,
there's so many more
dimensions to life
than television would tell us.
You know?
It's not two-dimensional,
this life.
So there you go.
So Paul Klee's busy
coming to artists
in the middle of the
night, right now.
>>REGINA: So why not Meister
Eckhart coming to you
in the middle of the night?
And you are, really, at the
epicenter of the resurgence
of this kind of mysticism.
You've sold over a
couple million books.
That's huge.
That's really huge.
I mean, people are
paying attention.
They're thirsty for this.
And it's not just Catholics.
>>FOX: Well, that's very true.
In fact, it's in
spite of Catholics.
It's wounded Catholics,
those who have left.
>>REGINA: Yes,
and you had, also,
an experience of-- as we talked
about in our last interview--
being, essentially,
excommunicated
from the Dominican
Order by Ratzinger.
Now, that is the
opposite of what
we were just talking about.
These fertile
dimensions and fields
where information has
a cycle and a time.
And there's a resurgence
of it when the time is here
and when the
information is needed.
That's not exactly how the
Catholic Church, you know,
embraces their philosophy.
And I want to get to something.
Ratzinger, he was the one
that was responsible--
because you were so
broad in your thinking
and what you told--
I just want to give
a little bit of background,
what happened under him.
Something was going on.
And then we have a totally
different kind of pope now.
Well, somewhat
different, anyway.
And I would like
you comment on it.
So under Ratzinger-- when we're
talking about the divine trying
to make its way in.
At the same time, we
have repressive forces--
his influence over
three million Germans--
I have here-- left the Catholic
Church during that time.
And the attendance
dropped by almost 90%.
And he was German.
What was going on?
You're trying to bring
in the light of what
we call the Rhineland Mystics.
And he's trying to suppress you.
He's trying to suppress that.
But people felt it.
>>FOX: Definitely they felt it.
And remember, I'm only
one of 105 theologians
that they booted and
hounded and destroyed.
So it was a policy.
And it began under
Pope John Paul II.
And Ratzinger was
his hatchet man.
But it continued, then, when
Ratzinger became pope too.
But I see it.
I wrote a book about this
called "The Pope's War," where
I go through the history
of the last 34 years
of the Catholic Church.
And it's not pretty.
But I came to this conclusion
that the Holy Spirit
is behind this.
The Holy Spirit gave
us two very bad popes
in order to destroy the
Catholic Church as we know it.
So we can start
Christianity over.
And today Christianity has
to travel much lighter.
I say, we don't need
basilicas on our back.
Backpacks are enough.
With the mystics
and the prophets,
the Jesus teachings,
and that's what
we need, to stir things and
assist the many transformations
that human beings have
to go through if we're
going to survive as a species.
Because frankly,
no betting person
would put money on our
species at this time.
Because we're not in good shape.
So we have to lighten
up our spiritual lives
and travel with less baggage.
And that's why I think the
Catholic Church, as we know it,
is definitely going under.
I mean, even this pope, who is
a very decent man, remember,
when he was Cardinal
in Argentina, only 10%
of Argentinian Catholics
were practicing.
So it's not as if he got a lot
of people to go to church then.
He's not naive.
The point is not
going to church.
The point is taking the
basic teachings of Jesus
and making them work.
>>REGINA: Yeah, and that's
what I found interesting,
is here we have,
at the same time,
Ratzinger was having this
really dreadful influence.
And people were dropping away
from the church every day.
That was the resurgence, also,
of not just the Rhineland
Mystics, of Hildegard, the
work you're doing, but also
of Hafiz and Rumi.
>>FOX: That's true.
That's true.
And, of course,
liberation theology,
which they went after tooth and
nail, with the help of the CIA.
>>REGINA: Tell us about that.
Tell us about that.
>>FOX: Well, you see, liberation
theology from Latin America
was all about bringing justice.
Many of the countries
back then, 30 years ago,
were dictated by dictators.
And the dictators, many
of them were propped up
by the CIA and the
American government.
And so the Christians there
started reading the Gospels
more carefully about what
it said about justice
and fairness and all.
And they started their
own base communities
outside the organized
institutional church.
And it became very strong.
And they had
excellent theologians
like Leonardo Boff and others.
And of course, Oscar
Romero comes out
of that tradition,
the bishop who
was shot down in El
Salvador, who the new pope is
about to declare a Saint.
And it was a very
powerful movement.
But I prove, in my
book, "The Pope's War,"
that when Ronald Reagan was made
president, three months later,
the National Security Council
met in Santa Fe, New Mexico.
And their whole week seminar was
how can we destroy liberation
theology in Latin America?
They concluded they
couldn't directly.
But they could split the church.
So they went after the
Pope, John Paul II,
with all kinds of
money for solidarity.
The head of CIA at the time
was a very right-wing Catholic.
He made 29 trips to the Vatican
with satchels full of cash.
Gave it to the pope, who give
it to solidarity in Poland.
But in return, the pope went
after liberation theology
in Latin America and
split the church there.
And but this new pope,
now, it's interesting,
that he's canonizing
Oscar Romero,
whereas the previous popes
didn't like him at all.
And he's supporting the
first liberation theologian--
who's now in his 80s--
had to flee South America.
Because his
right-wing Cardinal--
appointed by the previous
popes-- was after him.
So he's living his
last days in France
with the French Dominicans.
But this new pope
invited him to dinner.
So I mean, that's a
statement, you know?
>>REGINA: Well, he's
behaving a little more
like a warrior, which is going
to be a segue into Meister
Eckhart.
He is behaving more like that.
He's coming out
against a lot having
to do with the world of
finance and the banking system
as it is.
>>FOX: Absolutely.
He talks about
savage capitalism.
And of course, being
a third world person,
he knows the price that
one pays down there for--
>>REGINA: Tough
times in Argentina.
>>FOX: Exactly.
I mean, here, in
the United States,
Main Street took a hit from Wall
Street, with the last crash.
But imagine if you're living
that circumstance all the time.
Which is what a lot of
third world is undergoing.
So yeah, this pope is very
strong in that domain.
And of course,
there's also, now,
a very big backlash from
right-wing forces against that.
But that's just proof that he's
saying something worthwhile.
>>REGINA: He is.
And on the other hand, we
have to look at it honestly.
He's still not for the allowance
of birth control still.
So I mean, just to put
it in proper perspective,
he's doing his best.
>>FOX: Right, he still
has things to learn.
>>REGINA: But he still
>>FOX: And a lot of them
have to do with women.
>>REGINA: Yeah, I
was going to say,
not in alignment with
Hildegard, maybe, just yet.
Maybe that's your job,
is to bring Hildegard
to his consciousness.
>>FOX: That's true.
Well, even Francis,
the name he took,
you know, Francis, of
course, famous for ecology
and for the poor.
But there's a third
thing about Francis
that he rarely mentions.
Francis had this gender
justice in his psyche.
It comes out in his brilliant
poem about Brother Sun
and Sister Moon.
Each stanza in the poem
goes from the feminine
to the masculine, the
feminine to the masculine.
Mother Earth and Sister
Water and all this.
So Francis, his namesake,
had this inner sense
of gender justice.
This pope has to learn that.
>>REGINA: And so he hasn't
embraced that third aspect yet.
>>FOX: He hasn't
understood that yet.
It's hard for Jesuits
to understand that.
>>REGINA: Yes, I would think so.
>>FOX: Ignatius, the founder
of the Jesuits, was a soldier.
>>REGINA: Yes, yes.
Very militant.
>>FOX: And he was 16th century.
And the 16th century was the
most patriarchal century ever.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>FOX: And so it's very hard.
There are no women Jesuits.
There are women Benedictines
and women Dominicans
and Franciscans.
There are no women Jesuits.
So there's some catch
up he has to do there.
>>REGINA: There's some catch up.
OK, so now, we'll make
the Warrior segue.
Because Meister Eckhart,
you refer to him
as a mystic warrior.
Let's talk about why
you call him that.
And let's talk about his
early life coming through.
And set the stage for him.
>>FOX: Well, I think he's a
Warrior because he's strong.
He's like the Green Man is
here to defend Mother Earth.
So I think he's here to
defend good causes, the Divine
Feminine.
He's explicit about the
feminine side of God.
And for a man to be that
way, in the Middle Ages,
was quite unique.
He says, for example, what
does God do all day long?
God lies on a maternity
bed giving birth, he says.
So for him, creativity is at
the very core of the universe.
Which is, of course,
today's science.
We now know that a star is
being born every 15 seconds.
How different that is from
the mechanical universe we
had in the modern
era, when we were
told the sky was inert
and dead and all the rest.
But no, there's all
this birthing going on.
Well, Eckhart intuited that as
a mystic seven centuries ago.
>>REGINA: Now, how much was
he influenced by Hildegard?
>>FOX: He wasn't
much more influenced
by the Beguines, which was a
women's movement of his day.
I'm not sure that
he read Hildegard.
If he did, I don't
think he read a lot.
Again, she had been kind of
put on the shelf, if you will.
>>REGINA: That's right.
The church had
excommunicated her as well.
>>FOX: After she died, yeah.
But he was very involved
in the Beguine movement,
which was the women's movement.
In his day, women
had two choices.
Be a nun in a convent,
locked up in a convent.
Or be married.
The Beguines carved
their own way,
which they lived in
community with other women.
They did not take formal vows.
But they developed a very
vernacular spirituality,
if you will.
They were reading the
scriptures and the vernacular.
They were working.
They were artisans.
They were making stained glass.
Or they were making pottery
and so forth, sewing.
And they worked with the poor.
They worked with the young.
And they were at the
edge, you might say.
And they were considered very
dangerous by the patriarchy.
One pope, the same
pope that condemned
Eckhart, John the XXII,
condemned the Beguines
17 different times.
Which tells you, hey, this
wasn't exactly working, was it?
>>REGINA: Yeah, exactly.
>>FOX: Out, out,
damn spot, 17 times.
>>REGINA: And you too, out.
>>FOX: Yeah, and you too.
When that guy died,
that pope, there
were hundreds of
thousands of Beguines
flourishing all over Europe,
especially northern Europe.
>>REGINA: And these were some
very bold, intelligent women.
Well positioned too.
>>FOX: Yes.
Although, most of them
came from lower classes.
So they weren't as
well educated as,
like, Hildegard's women were.
But yes, they got
themselves educated.
And they hung out with the
Dominicans and the Franciscans.
Which, at that time,
were a new orders.
And so this was kind
of an edgy thing to do.
And there was one woman,
Marguerite Porete,
who was a writer.
>>REGINA: Yes, I was
going to get into her.
Please.
>>FOX: A French
writer, theologian.
And she was burned at the
stake in Paris in 1210.
And a year later,
Eckhart moved to Paris.
It was his third time in Paris.
And I think he was really
upset by what happened to her.
And he left the next
year and never came back.
But curiously, a Dominican
in whose convent he lived
was the inquisitor who got
Marguerite Porete burned
at the stake.
I think it's very
likely that he took
Marguerite's book with him,
or at least copied it down.
Why?
Because we now know that in
one of his most famous sermons,
he's actually quoting
Marguerite Porete.
Now, think about that.
That's warriorhood, how
courageous that was.
You know, most people
would slink away
from someone who's just
been burned at the stake.
He went around quoting her.
What can I say an accolade that
is, to this woman theologian,
that this male
theologian was quoting
her the rest of his life?
>>REGINA: Yes.
Yes.
She was, like Hildegard, a
very brave outspoken woman.
>>FOX: She was very brave.
And her whole book is
about a church of love
instead of a church of power.
And she talks about
two different churches,
the Church of Love and
the Church of Hierarchy.
And so she, too, was a Reformer.
This was 200 years
before Luther.
And she was trying to
rattle those cages.
And interesting, too, when they
burned her, they asked her,
do you want some
drugs or something?
No, she said.
>>REGINA: She didn't
receive any help.
>>FOX: She didn't
And she didn't ask.
She didn't want any.
>>REGINA: No.
It's an amazing story.
>>FOX: She showed
amazing courage.
It's an amazing story.
And it's only recently that
we have the whole story.
Only recently have we been able
to prove that that book was
written by her.
For centuries, they thought
it was written by a man.
>>REGINA: The name
of the book again?
If you remember it, offhand?
>>FOX: I'm sorry.
I didn't look it up.
>>REGINA: Because I didn't
write it down, here, either.
>>FOX: OK.
>>REGINA: You have it?
>>FOX: The book
is called "Mirror
of the Simple Annihilated
Souls for Those That Tarry
Solely in Desiring
and Demanding Love."
Kind of a long title.
But notice, "Mirror the Simple,
Those Who Desire and Demand
Love."
That's the name of her book.
>>REGINA: So that would be
enough to get you burned,
when you have a story
about love, right?
And let's go back,
now, to Eckhart.
Because I have one
of those quotes
you were talking
about, compassion.
And I have one of the quotes
I've written down here
that I particularly liked.
But he stated God is compassion.
So with compassion, if
love was a central theme
for her and for
Hildegard, compassion
was a central theme
for Eckhart, right?
>>FOX: Yes, it was.
>>REGINA: OK.
So this particular
quote says, "We
are compassionate
like the father when
we are compassionate.
Not from passion,
not from impulse,
but from deliberate choice
and reasonable decision.
The passion does not take
the lead but follows.
Does not rule but serves."
>>FOX: Yes.
He has another place where
he talks about passion.
He says that we should put the
bridle of love on our passions.
He says, that will
carry you much further
than repressing them
or putting them down.
And notice the image.
A bridle, of course, is
a steering instrument
for a stallion.
>>REGINA: Yes, of our passions.
>>FOX: He's saying, we all
have a stallion inside of us.
It's a wonderful thing.
You don't have to
lock it in the barn.
You don't have to do
asceticism and beat it up.
But you have to be smarter
than your passions.
>>REGINA: Guide it wisely.
>>FOX: You've got guide it.
You have to guide it and not
let it run away with you.
Just like a horse.
>>REGINA: So that
was a common theme,
it sounds like, with
these Rhineland Mystics.
>>FOX: Yes.
That's right.
They were not afraid of passion.
>>REGINA: No.
>>FOX: They saw
its positive side.
And again, I give the
Celts credit for that.
That's Celtic spirituality.
There's a wildness to it.
I mean, if you've ever been
to the west coast of Ireland,
there's a wildness to the
wind and to the weather,
just to survive over there.
And I think that's part of the
gift of the Celtic Christianity
was lost when order became
more important than chaos.
How do we balance
order and chaos?
That's really the question.
And the danger is that
we want to control chaos.
That's what all
Fundamentalism is trying
to control the Goddess Chaos.
>>REGINA: Well, and feminine
is the chaotic principle.
>>FOX: Pardon me?
>>REGINA: In the
ancient teachings,
the feminine is the
chaotic principle.
>>FOX: Exactly.
And it's the goddess
in the goddess times.
It was honored and necessary.
But whenever patriarchy
takes over in Fundamentalism,
it always thinks its job is
to control the goddess chaos.
And then what do you have?
You have no creativity left.
>>REGINA: No, then you get
that dry as toast doctrine.
>>FOX: Well, exactly.
You get law and order.
And nothing else.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>FOX: And you get fascism.
>>REGINA: Yes, fascism.
And another thing that's
interesting about him,
is in a lot of the
religious doctrines,
it's the light of God.
And he was saying that
the essence of God
comes from the dark.
Now, take some time and
explain what this means.
And I definitely get
that, when you're
looking at the notion of the
feminine principle, chaos,
fertile ground for giving
birth and so forth.
What does it actually mean?
>>FOX: Well, it's all
those things and more.
It also applies to the
new science and cosmology
that we're talking now about.
Dark matter and dark
energy constitute
98% of all the energy
in the universe.
And we don't even
know what they are.
But that's what
science is saying.
And they don't know,
yet, what it is.
Because it is dark.
So there's this return
of darkness, today,
to our psyches, and
it's coming through.
For example, many people
are having experiences
with the Black Madonna.
And not just Christian
people but others.
And what does a Black
Madonna represent
archetypally and universally?
Well, again, the
darkness of the soil,
the darkness of the universe.
Astronauts and cosmonauts
have gone up into the sky
and come back mystics-- and
I talked to some of them--
because the experience of
silence and darkness up there,
it makes them mystics.
So this is what is called,
traditionally, the Apophatic
Divinity, the god of darkness.
Eckhart says "God is
super essential darkness
who has no name.
It will never be given a name."
So there's a sense of
mystery that we're not
in control of the divine.
And the divine is unnameable.
It's often dark.
Of course, we also can go
through our own dark nights
of the soul.
I think, today, our species
is in a collective dark night,
dark night of our species.
Because we don't know
what's coming next.
We don't have the answers.
And the mystics
that'll teach us,
there's a lot to learn
in this dark night.
There's a lot to learn
about this wisdom, not just
knowledge.
And that's about compassion.
And now, Thich Nhat Hanh,
the Buddhist theologian monk
says that he loves the
Apophatic Divinity,
the divinity of darkness.
He says, when
Christians recover it,
then we'll learn anew the real
treasures in Christianity.
>>REGINA: It just made
so much sense to me.
>>FOX: And no one
knows it better,
has spoken of it more
than Eckhart, in the west.
I mean, he's so at home with
this Apophatic Divinity.
But he has both.
He has a god of
light, the Cataphatic,
and the god of darkness.
But he really--
what should I say--
speaks out on the
god of darkness.
>>REGINA: Well, and
it's interesting.
Because when you get into
a lot of the new physics,
for example, you're
talking black hole theory.
You're talking about
some of them saying,
not only is it not a
void, it's a plenum.
You look at the
energy, maybe even
taking into the realm
of entity, super entity
behind the sun, which is
what we see as a simple spark
or expression, that has risen
from this dark well of all that
creates.
And the same thing
when you look the soil.
Every seed is planted in that.
And on a personal
level, I used to feel
something was, maybe, wrong
with me and my meditations.
Because I didn't go into
a light-filled place.
But where I did go,
and always have gone,
was this beautiful,
quiet, dark field,
where everything existed
and nothing all at once.
Completely quiet,
peaceful, and beautiful.
And I thought, how come
we can't see the light?
>>FOX: That's beautiful.
That's powerful.
>>REGINA: Yet, everything
was already there.
>>FOX: Eckhart says the
ground of the soul is dark.
And that's where you traveled.
Good for you.
>>REGINA: That's
where I go, yeah.
>>FOX: But again, the
ground, the ocean is dark.
The ground of the sky is dark.
The ground of the soil is dark.
>>REGINA: Exactly.
>>FOX: So why are we
so afraid of darkness?
>>REGINA: That's why I
wanted to bring this part
of the conversation up.
>>FOX: Yes.
Well, you see, the
modern era, remember,
it was launched with
the "Enlightenment."
We call it the Enlightenment.
And it's left brained.
It's knowledge.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>FOX: And that's a good thing.
We want the lights on to
read books and write them
and all the rest.
But there's this other thing.
It's what you meet
in a sweat lodge,
for example, where
it's utterly dark.
And that's back to
the womb, literally.
>>REGINA: I was just going to
say, the darkness of the womb,
yeah.
>>FOX: For nine months,
we lived in the dark.
And it was fine.
And so a healthy
mysticism has ways
to bring you back
to that darkness,
just like you found
in your meditation.
And it's in the darkness
that we feel oneness.
And you don't see
difference in the darkness.
You see unity in the darkness.
And you feel it.
It's not really seeing it.
You feel it.
>>REGINA: Oh, everything
exists there already,
in pure quietude.
>>FOX: Exactly.
So wonderful, you've
already made this journey.
You and Eckhart are
on the same page.
>>REGINA: Well, I don't know
that we're on the same page.
But that's where I go.
That's where I have always gone.
>>FOX: That's a
good place to go.
>>REGINA: And I've
always loved it.
I've loved the feeling.
But really, I thought, where?
Other people see
this blinding light.
I'm not seeing this
blinding light.
It might be uncomfortable even.
I don't know.
OK, so now, let's go further.
>>FOX: That's true.
Just to make one point.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>FOX: Hildegard's mysticism
was much more light oriented.
She talked about
the living light.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>FOX: And her illuminations,
what she calls her paintings
and visions.
So she was much more of
a light-oriented mystic.
She does not talk a
whole lot about the dark.
Whereas Eckhart talks
a lot about the dark.
So you have more in common,
really, with Eckhart
than with Hildegard
in that regard.
>>REGINA: Yes.
But the whole thing
with vision, she
had this encroachment
of light and such
that was always present.
So when she started
having visions,
now that's a little
different thing.
Visions aren't the same as
going to this wonderful field,
for me.
>>FOX: Exactly, the
visions are about light.
She called the encounter
with the living light.
You see?
>>REGINA: Yes.
And even if one starts
to go unconscious,
the first thing you
see is loads of light
flooding the field of vision.
Which is an interesting--
because you're
in an interface between a
conscious and unconscious
state.
So I mean, all of it, the
play of the light and dark,
is fascinating.
>>FOX: Absolutely.
>>REGINA: And beauty
comes from all of it.
But I agree with you, not
to be afraid of the notion
of a beautiful dark field.
It's the cosmos.
It's everything.
We all come from it.
>>FOX: Yes.
Right.
>>REGINA: OK, so this
statement, I absolutely love.
This is from Thomas Aquinas,
which is just beautiful.
"Humans are capable
of the universe."
And this is a theme
that Eckhart played on.
>>FOX: Yes.
>>REGINA: What does that mean?
>>FOX: Remember, both Aquinas
and Eckhart were Dominicans.
So Eckhart knew
Aquinas very well.
Though Aquinas was under
a cloud his whole life.
Because Aquinas was condemned.
After he died, three
bishops condemned him.
So the Dominicans, to
their credit, they fought.
>>REGINA: The only way
you can trust a guy is
if he's been condemned.
>>FOX: Well, that's right.
>>REGINA: I think that's
what's rising here.
>>FOX: And in fact, Eckhart's
trial, at the end of his life,
many scholars relate to the
fact that Aquinas had just
been canonized a saint.
And the Franciscans
didn't like this.
Because their man wasn't
canonized a saint.
So the Franciscans
were the first ones
to call a trial against Eckhart.
So people put the
two together, that it
was Aquinas' canonization
that got Eckhart in trouble.
So besides everything
he was saying.
>>REGINA: Besides
everything he was saying.
>>FOX: They were all other
Christs, for example.
>>REGINA: But let's
talk about this notion
that humans are a unique
species in the cosmos
and on this planet.
And I've often wondered,
even in the passages
in the Bible,
biblical references,
as the Son of God, meaning is
that maybe not a broader term
having to do with this
incredible human expression?
>>FOX: Absolutely.
I mean, biblical
scholars today all agree
that Jesus is not
only the Son of God.
In Israel, before Jesus, Israel
itself was called Son of God,
and individuals were
called Son of God.
Anyone who's living
a life of wisdom,
in the Jewish
tradition, is a "Son
of God" or "Daughter of God".
And so the idea that only
Jesus is the Son of God,
this came, again, in
the fourth century
with the Council of Nicaea.
And a lot of it
was very political.
That consulate was
called by the emperor.
And he wanted order in
the empire and all that.
But Jesus didn't go around
calling himself a son of God.
But he was called the
Son of God because people
recognized he was living
out a life of wisdom.
>>REGINA: But the
larger reference
is, too, the human species.
>>FOX: It's a larger reference.
Yes.
And to our capacity, to
be carriers of the divine
compassion.
>>REGINA: Well, like
this says, humans
are capable of the universe.
>>FOX: Capable of the universe.
>>REGINA: Spend a little time
explaining that and talking
about that in principle.
>>FOX: Well, today, for
example, I mean, we're
picking up sounds from
the original fireball
13.8 billion years ago.
That's the universe
talking to us, isn't it?
>>REGINA: Mm-hmm.
>>FOX: We're picking up pictures
of the edge of the universe.
And you know, before long,
the universe is expanding.
And it's going to
go over the horizon.
We are living at
this remarkable time
in the history of the
universe and this planet,
where we humans can actually
see the edge of the universe.
Because in a while, it's
going to go over the edge.
No one will be able
to see it again.
So we're capable, obviously.
>>REGINA: What does that mean,
we are capable of the universe?
>>FOX: Well, that we're
made for something very big.
We're not here just for
television and a good meal.
And building pyramids
for our children.
>>REGINA: Thank you
for the reminder, yes.
>>FOX: That we're capable
of the whole universe.
That we have this big
soul that will never
be satisfied without some
cosmic food and nourishment.
And, again, this is
Aquinas' teaching.
Again, it's premodern teaching.
In many ways, indigenous
people say the same thing.
That, for example, an
aboriginal in Australia
said to me one night, he
said, the stars, he said,
we don't teach our children
that those are stars up there.
We say, these are the
campfires of our ancestors
who are looking down at us to
see what's cooking on earth.
So notice, they
personalize the universe.
A star is not just an object.
It's a campfire.
And notice, in that
effort to blend and make
a family of ourselves and
the rest of the universe.
This is an ancient quest in
the human heart and soul.
We want to feel that we belong.
And that's where
Eckhart started.
But we belong to the whole,
to something very vast.
And today, of course,
we're learning
about the universe,
how old it is,
and how busy it is birthing,
and how vast it is.
This is all part of us.
We drink this stuff in.
We're curious.
We want to know our origins.
And it's all holy.
And this is part of
the cosmic Christ, too,
that the Christ is that big.
Or the Buddha
nature is that big.
And so that's a way of kind
of talking about it as, well,
as Hildegard does,
that we're being
our hugged by the arms of
the mystery of the universe.
>>REGINA: How did
he describe soul?
>>FOX: Aquinas?
>>REGINA: Eckhart.
>>FOX: Eckhart.
Well, for one thing, he
and Aquinas both said,
the soul is not in the body.
The body's in the soul.
>>REGINA: Yes, I like this part.
>>FOX: I like it too.
Because it's about
the expansion.
And Eckhart, time
and again, he says,
God is delighted to
watch your soul enlarge.
So he's really for expansion.
And at one point,
I think it's one
of his most important sermons.
He says, it's very hard
to talk about the soul.
What we can say,
is that the soul
is where God works compassion.
>>REGINA: Again,
back to compassion.
>>FOX: Back to compassion.
>>REGINA: And Hildegard
would say love.
But it's all one in the same.
>>FOX: That's right.
And so for Eckhart,
you don't really
have a soul until you're
on the path of compassion
and the path of active love.
So we shouldn't be
complacent, should we?
>>REGINA: No, we should not.
OK, and the other thing
is he, like Hildegard,
he was a man of the
science of the day.
He believed in
blending the offerings
of the intellect with our
religious or spiritual fervor.
But he believed that the seat
of the intellect was the heart.
>>FOX: Yes.
And Aquinas before
him taught that too.
And that's the Jewish teaching.
In the Jewish tradition, the
intellect is in the heart,
not in the head.
Which again, is very different
from today's modern science,
which is saying the
intellect's in the brain.
Which really, has
never be proven.
It's a dogma, as
Rupert Sheldrake says.
It's never been proven.
>>REGINA: No.
>>FOX: No, but really,
what they're saying, then,
is that wherever our soul
travels-- our imaginations,
our dreams, our passions--
into the universe,
all that is your soul.
And the intellect is meant
to operate with the heart.
And that's what wisdom is.
That's what distinguishes
wisdom from knowledge.
The knowledge is just the
left side of the brain.
Wisdom incorporates the
heart and the right side
of the brain,
which is intuition.
And you know who else talks
about that, is Einstein.
Einstein says that values do
not come from the intellect.
They come from
intuition, he says,
which is also deep feeling.
That is where values come from.
And Einstein says, I
abhor American education.
Why?
Because it's all
about the rational,
the one side of the brain.
And not about the intuition.
And of course, for me,
another word for intuition
is mysticism.
>>REGINA: Well, and
Einstein was a mystic.
>>FOX: That's right.
>>REGINA: And all of
his great breakthroughs
came from intuition,
not the intellect.
>>FOX: There you go.
Also, by the way, angels Aquinas
says, learn only by intuition.
So what that means to
me is that when you're
on the highway of
intuition, you're
going to be picking up angels
who are hitchhiking there.
You see?
And so when you're
being creative,
you see, we have the special
word for it, the Muses,
don't we?
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>FOX: So angels inspire us.
And it says they carry
thoughts from prophet
to prophet, like a bee carries
nectar from flower to flower.
So that's part of
opening our minds up too,
to the presence of the angels.
And as we talked about
earlier, the ancestors too.
>>REGINA: Absolutely.
And you know, bridging
science and consciousness,
spirituality, I
had the privilege
of being party to watching
a little experiment that
was being conducted.
And it was between two
different modalities
of measuring responses in the
being, in the intelligence.
And one of them had
the EEG monitors on.
This was from a
brain state system.
And the other one, he
was using the heart math.
And they had their
various sensors on.
And they were giving
various stimuli
to the person who
was in the chair,
and watching which one
started responding first.
And by just that
millisecond, the heart
was always responding before
the brain to this stimuli.
>>FOX: Wow.
Very interesting.
>>REGINA: Uh-huh.
And then if you
read further, it'll
say neuropeptides,
even in the stomach--
those gut feelings we
have, the deep feeling
we have-- will respond
more quickly to a situation
than the brain has the
capability to respond.
>>FOX: There you go.
That's why I talk about
all the chakras have
to be engaged in education
and in spirituality, not just
the head chakra.
>>REGINA: Yes.
So OK, now, one
thing Eckhart was
big on was the notion that we
each give birth to the Christ
inside ourselves.
So first, his definition
of Christ, and what
does that mean?
>>FOX: Well again, he
had a deep understanding
of the cosmic Christ.
>>REGINA: Creation
spirituality comes in here.
Right?
>>FOX: Yes, definitely.
>>REGINA: Can you
talk about that?
We didn't really get
around to it in Hildegard.
Just to give a definition
of creation spirituality?
>>FOX: Well,
creation spirituality
is the oldest
tradition in the Bible,
actually, the J source
in the Hebrew Bible
is creation centered.
There's tradition of wisdom
literature in the Bible,
which is a tradition of Jesus.
He comes from the
Wisdom tradition.
And it's about finding God in
nature, not just God in a book.
Books are very recent.
We've only been literate for
a few thousand years, really.
And so does that mean that
13.8 billion years, God wasn't
writing things?
Aquinas says, revelation
comes in two volumes, nature
and the Bible.
So that emphasis on
nature as a revelation
is creation spirituality.
Creation spirituality
is feminist insofar
as wisdom is feminine in the
Bible and around the world.
It's not afraid of science.
It's eager to learn
what science has to say.
Because science's job--
>>REGINA: It's not
in conflict with it.
>>FOX: It's not in conflict.
Science's job is to tell
us what nature's all about.
Aquinas said, a mistake
about nature results
in a mistake about God.
Well, that's an affirmation
of the scientist's vocation.
Teach us about nature,
we'll know more about God.
And one concrete example,
today, would be homosexuality.
For centuries, tribes have
felt, oh this is unnatural.
It's not unnatural, we now know.
8% to 10% of a
population is going
to be gay any place
on the planet.
So get over it.
There's a reason for this.
So it's the Galileo
case of our time,
I think, that religion is
fumbling the ball again
and looking in
their bibles instead
of asking science what they
have to say about that subject.
>>REGINA: So the cosmic
Christ and giving birth
to that within us.
>>FOX: Eckhart, at a Christmas
mass, he gave a sermon.
And he said, what
good is it to me
if Mary gave birth to the
Son of God 1,400 years ago?
And I don't do it in my person,
in my time, and in my culture?
We are all meant to be
mothers of God, he said.
So there you go.
You see, the Christ is always
needing to be born, he said.
So again, religion can
freeze things and freeze it
in the past.
Oh, Mary did it all.
And so we have to
worship her son.
>>REGINA: Our responsibility.
>>FOX: No.
We have to get involved.
Exactly, our responsibility.
So what we give birth
to, our children, yes.
But our citizenship,
our work, our community,
all our efforts at learning and
developing ourselves and giving
back.
This is all a birthing
of the Christ.
Or if you're more at
home with the language,
of the Buddha nature.
I lectured in Korea this summer.
And there was a
Buddhist monk there
who came up to me the next day.
He said, obviously
in your previous life
you were a Buddhist monk.
OK, I said, fine.
He said, that phrase,
cosmic Christ,
I've never heard it before.
I'm going to start talking about
the cosmic Buddha, he said.
So we got going on that.
Yes, and again,
as I said earlier,
this is the creation tradition.
It's the Celtic tradition
that every being is holy.
Mary Oliver has this
great poem where
she talks about how she's
sitting in a river on a rock
and listening very carefully.
And after many hours,
she begins to hear
what the river is saying.
The river is saying, I am holy.
And the moss in the river
is saying, I am holy.
And the rock is
saying, I am holy.
That's the cosmic Christ,
the holiness of all beings.
>>REGINA: And that part
of his thought was ecology
is a kind of
spiritual observance.
>>FOX: Absolutely
because turn that around.
If we're destroying rainforests
and whales and polar bears
and elephants, we are crucifying
the Christ all over again.
You see?
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>FOX: That, again, we shouldn't
be looking just in the past.
The Roman Empire
crucified Jesus.
But our empire and
empires are crucifying
the polar bears
and the rainforest
and the earth itself.
So let's get real.
>>REGINA: And he wanted
to, at the same time,
embracing all that exists here,
as to move beyond the five
senses and really understand
the nature of divine creation.
And we're part of that.
>>FOX: Yes.
>>REGINA: It's a top-down thing.
It's not hierarchical.
>>FOX: No.
Not at all.
I mean, for example, he says, if
I was alone and feeling afraid,
I would like to have
an animal with me.
Perhaps a dog.
Because equality gives
strength in all things.
Now, notice what he's saying.
He's saying at the
level of being,
we're equal to
these other beings.
We're not superior.
And that's why you want an
animal in your life or a stone
or beings of various kinds,
to remind us that we all
have received being.
Being is a gift for everybody.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>FOX: And being is holy.
He says, isness is God.
Being is God.
And it's omnipresent, therefore,
the presence of the divine.
But we have to have a certain
humility to appreciate that.
>>REGINA: Yes, we do.
>>FOX: We have to realize
we're equal to the animals.
We're not superior.
>>REGINA: We're not a
very humble species.
>>FOX: Have you noticed?
>>REGINA: And that's the
most difficult thing,
is to watch the cruelty that's
displayed against the animal
kingdom.
>>FOX: Exactly.
>>REGINA: And against trees.
>>FOX: And against trees.
You see, yes.
Against the soil.
Which is also cruelty against
our great-great-grandchildren
to come.
Because their lives will be that
much less rich and beautiful
when all this other
beauty disappears.
>>REGINA: Another
of his which was
similar-- we talked about in
the beginning of the interview.
It wasn't expressed
the same way--
the notion that to be
in sync with the divine
is to be in a state
of creativity.
That creation and creativity
is key to our existence
as spiritual beings,
and that we're
supposed to be creating
and recreating ourselves
and everything
around us every day.
>>FOX: Exactly.
He has a whole theology
of the Holy Spirit.
He gave a sermon on--
it's from the Psalmist.
It talks about
the rushing river.
And he says the Holy Spirit is
a rushing river of creativity.
And it's a marvelous sermon
because you feel the energy.
The image I have of
being in a creative state
is being on a raft
without oars, just
going down a rushing river.
You're not in control.
And you're not looking
at the time, either.
You just know you're having a
good time, and it's important.
>>REGINA: That's one of
my favorite meditations.
Head first.
>>FOX: There you
go, head first even.
Oh, wow.
Yeah, but so Eckhart
develops, incredibly,
this whole theology, of the
Holy Spirit and creativity.
Well, of course
Aquanis before him
said that the same
spirit that hovered
over the waters of the
beginning of creation
hovers over the mind
of the artist at work.
So in other words, this
is the Holy Spirit.
It is the creative spirit
that is working on us that
worked on the big creation too.
And Eckhart says the Holy
Spirit that gave birth to Jesus
in Mary's rule,
that overshadowed
her-- as the scriptures say--
overshadows us too and gives
birth to us.
You see?
And to us giving
birth to the Christ.
So he sees the Holy
Spirit working everywhere
as the creative spirit.
And co-creation, for him,
is a very important word
as it was for Hildegard
150 years sooner, earlier.
>>REGINA: And so now we
live in a merchant society,
essentially.
And people are under the
guidance of various churches
that have structure.
And they have a need
for financial support
and so forth, which has created
almost an automated species.
We appear to be
the exact opposite
of this basic tenant of life.
>>FOX: Exactly.
And he talks
explicitly about that.
He took on capitalism
in his day.
This is one reason
he was on trial.
And Cologne, where he
did his big preaching,
was a center of capitalism
for Europe at that time.
And here they were building
a brand new cathedral.
It exists today, a
gingerbread Gothic.
It was half done
in Eckhart's day.
>>REGINA: Where is this?
>>FOX: In Cologne.
>>REGINA: In Cologne, OK.
>>FOX: He got up in
that half-done cathedral
with all the bankers
and bishops, all proud
of themselves in the front row.
And he said, the only
temple that counts is
the temple in the human heart.
And he took, as a text,
Jesus driving money lenders
from the temple.
And he said, we have
become merchants.
It's all buy and sell.
He said, most people treat
God like they do a cow.
For the amount of cheese and
milk you can get from God.
You know?
It's all about
something for something.
And he said, this is
not how God works.
And he goes on.
And he calls it the
merchant mentality
that is taking over our souls.
So he was fierce.
>>REGINA: Well, he was--
>>FOX: And capitalism was
just coming into its own
at that time.
>>REGINA: You can imagine
if he were here today.
>>FOX: Oh my.
>>REGINA: What would
his reflection be?
>>FOX: Well, I think he would
agree with Pope Francis,
that there is such a thing
as savage capitalism.
And that it can devour us.
Because as he says,
this merchant mentality
is a way of seeing the world,
in terms of give and take.
So he talks, as
Buddhists do, he talks
about living without a why--
W-H-Y-- loving without a why,
and working without a why.
And this takes the rug out
from this merchant mentality.
Because the merchant
mentality is always for a why.
How much am I going to get?
And so he has an answer to it.
He's not just complaining.
And let me say, too, in
that sermon, he says,
I'm not talking
about the merchants.
I'm talking about
religious people
who think they can get
things from God this way.
So that's what makes
him really radical.
He's not talking
about the other.
He's taking on his own
profession, religion itself.
That's what he's criticizing.
>>REGINA: And he was
talking about our working
for the sake of it, to
create for the sake of it.
>>FOX: You work in
order to work, he says.
You do justice in
order to do justice.
And see, that's the
Warrior energy too.
That it's not just about
what are the results.
Although you do your
best to get good results.
The point is that you
live a life integrity.
And that your path,
the way, is itself
a Christ path, if you
will, or a justice path.
And you let the chips
fall where they may.
You see, Eckhart's trial was
really about three things.
One was his relationship to
women and the Beguine movement.
Another was his taking on the
excessive capitalist powers
of his day explicitly.
But third was that he was the
first intellectual preacher
to preach in German.
German, in his day, was the
dialect of the peasants.
And we actually found trial
transcripts from his trial
in the 19th century.
And it was clear that this
was an issue at his trial.
They said to him,
why are you preaching
to the peasants, these
uneducated people,
in their own language, telling
them that they are aristocrats
and they're nobles?
And that they are other Christ?
You're confusing the simple
people, they said to him.
If you would preach in Latin,
like everyone else is doing,
we'd let you go.
Because the peasants weren't
getting the sermons in Latin.
What did Eckhart say?
Oh, I'm so sorry.
I'll never do it again?
This was his answer.
How'd he put it?
The ignorant need to learn.
So if they do not, they will not
know how to live or why to die.
10 years after he spoke
that, the peasant wars
broke out in Germany, where
tens of thousands of peasants
were murdered.
So he was living in
a time like ours,
when the rich were
getting richer
and the poor were
getting poorer.
And he saw the gap.
And he tried to do
something about it.
And that's a main reason
why he was condemned also.
>>REGINA: He was the most
popular preacher of the time.
Right?
>>FOX: He was.
And preaching was kind of the
only art form in town too.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>FOX: It was entertainment.
And it was education.
Yes.
>>REGINA: But this populist
message, elevating everyone
to that of royalty.
Because under the heavens,
we are all the same creation,
this divine creation that
is capable of the universe.
And he kept pounding that
home with the peasants.
>>FOX: Pounding it
And he said, you're all nobles.
You soar like the eagle.
You have the beauty
of the eagle.
And of course, the eagle
is a biblical metaphor
for the prophet, too, you see?
And for wisdom.
Because the eagle sees
things with perspective
and soars above things.
He says, you all
have this power.
You see?
And this was
stepping on the toes
of those who thought themselves
uniquely aristocrats.
So he disturbed the pot there.
>>REGINA: And so
tell us what happened
toward the end of his life,
with his times and career?
Because he went into
obscurity, just like Hildegard.
>>FOX: Well, there was a trial
called in Cologne against him.
And he actually won that trial.
Then, there was a trial called
in Avignon, where the pope was
living then, in France.
And he traveled to that trial.
And he went through it.
And then he died a week later.
After it was over, he died
just a week afterwards.
And then they put out this
papal bull condemning many
of his ideas-- supposed ideas.
And that was kind
of the end of him
as far as his work permeating
mainstream Christianity.
And remember, then,
within a century,
you had Luther and
the Reformation.
I do believe that if
Eckhart had been listened to
and understood, that probably
the violence of the Reformation
would not have been necessary.
Because he was trying
to reform the Church,
like Francis tried to do
before him and like Hildegard
before Francis.
>>REGINA: So because
of his condemnation,
he went into obscurity?
>>FOX: He went into obscurity.
And what's even
worse is the idea
that you can marry mysticism
and social action, mysticism
and prophetic warriorhood--
that went underground.
And it came up a
bit with Luther.
It came out more with the
radical Protestants, who
depended entirely on Eckhart's
theology of the word of God,
that every creature is a word
of God and a book about God,
he said.
Because the peasants remember,
in Luther's day, 2/3 of Germany
was illiterate.
And they were peasants.
And so they didn't read books.
They read nature.
And so they loved
what Eckhart taught,
every creature is a book of God.
And they kind of resented
Luther and these intelligentsia
there, learning
languages and everything
and getting their
theology from books.
So the radical process is
Hans Denck, Sebastian Franck,
and Hans Hutt.
They followed Eckhart's
theology of the word of God.
But it's really in the
Quakerism and George Fox
that you get Eckhart, again.
Because he marries social
protest-- he goes to jail a lot
under the King-- with mysticism.
So in many ways, the Quaker
movement is very Eckhartian.
The very first time
I lectured on Eckhart
was in a Quaker house
outside Chicago.
>>REGINA: Oh, interesting.
>>FOX: And I'll never
forget, when I finished,
the head lady-- who was a
big, strong lady-- she boomed
from the back of the room.
My God, she said, it sounds
just like George Fox, she said.
So I think that's
very interesting too.
Because a profound
contemplation,
contemplative life,
and an active life,
for Eckhart, are
thoroughly compatible.
But what we have mostly
is dualism, either/or.
>>REGINA: Yes.
Yes.
OK, but I have one question
I still need to ask you.
And that is you have
spent decades writing
about the mystical nature of
these people in the church
and the early
church, the Rhineland
mystics in particular.
But what does this tell us
about your own mystical nature?
>>FOX: Well, I grew
up in Wisconsin.
And Wisconsin is a place
where the spirits of the land
are still very alive.
The Native American
memories are alive there.
I had Native American
dreams when I was a boy.
And of course, the
nature in Wisconsin,
you have all these lakes
where I grew up, in Madison
and the four seasons.
And I just got high on
nature all the time.
And then in high
school, I remember
getting high on hearing
Beethoven's seventh, on reading
Shakespeare, and then
reading "War and Peace" when
I was a junior in high school.
I told my friend it
blew my soul wide open.
So I had a mystical life.
Also, at 12, I got polio.
And I lost my legs.
And they couldn't tell me
if I'd ever walk again.
My father been a football coach
at the University of Wisconsin.
My older brothers were
all state football.
And I figured, this is
what it meant to be a man.
But here, I had to give that up.
And I had another experience.
And this Dominican brother used
to visit me in the hospital.
And he was the
opposite of my father.
He was very contemplative.
He ended up being a
Trappist monk, in fact.
And I realized, well, this is
another way of being a man.
And so then, when I got
my legs back after a year,
I remember saying
to the universe
that I'll never take my
legs for granted again.
And I think that's a
very mystical intuition,
not to take for granted.
That's why breathing is so
important in meditation.
It's so easy to take
breath for granted.
But when you think about
it, it's rather primal
that we've got breath.
And it's a heck of a gift.
So I think I've been
blessed with a rather
rich mystical life.
Just from those sources alone.
But I came of age in the '60s.
So the whole prophetic thing,
the Civil Rights Movement,
the anti-war thing,
then the gay revolution,
and the women's movement, and
of course, ecology movement.
All these have been
extremely important to me.
So in my doctoral
studies in Paris,
studying the history
of spiritually,
my question was can we relate
mysticism and social justice?
Or are they separate tracks?
So all my books are
dealing with that topic.
And I love Eckhart's
statement that compassion is
where peace and justice kiss.
Compassion is where
peace and justice kiss.
That's mysticism and
warriorhood coming together.
And that nails it for me.
>>REGINA: And you are
a warrior as well.
And on that note, I
wanted to thank you
so much for your many,
many, many years of devotion
to this work.
And also, for
being here with me.
>>FOX: Well, thank you.
And thank you for your
work and for your intuition
to invite me.
>>REGINA: To educate
yourself on the works
of the great
Rhineland Mystics, you
can purchase any of Dr.
Fox's 30-plus books.
His work gives depth
to our understanding
of the divine aspects
of life and creation.
Until next time, thank you for
joining us here on Gaiam TV.
[THEME MUSIC]